Tesla Motors Can’t Maintain ‘Ludicrous’ Speed
With skepticism growing, Tesla can still get away with losses. But it will also need to hit delivery targets to keep its ludicrous valuation.
By Spencer Jakab
Follow
Nov. 2, 2015 2:12 pm ET

Its sedan’s top acceleration mode isn’t the only thing “ludicrous” about Tesla Motors Inc. TSLA 2.54%▲

Ask many observers, and the company’s full-year delivery target of between 50,000 and 55,000 vehicles is starting to look that way. Based on preliminary figures the company released about the third quarter—it unveils complete results Tuesday—it has delivered 33,157 so far in 2015. Tacking on an additional 16,843 to 21,843 seems a tall order given likely teething problems around making its new Model X sport-utility vehicle.
But deliveries for a car with what the company says is a long waiting list are a short-term issue. What matters is the company’s ability to eventually make money, and preferably lots of it, to support a nearly $28 billion market value—1½ times that of Fiat Chrysler Automobiles NV with around 1% of its unit sales.
The third quarter of 2015 will likely repeat the same pattern of each reporting period going back as far as the beginning of last year—sharply lowered expectations that the company may or may not clear. Each quarter was seen as profitable a year earlier and the company still hasn’t achieved that distinction, except on a pro forma basis. Analysts think Tesla will report a loss of 79 cents a share for the period, under generally accepted accounting principles, compared with a loss of 52 cents in the same period a year earlier.
 PHOTO: THE WALL STREET JOURNAL

There are signs that investors and analysts are starting to separate their wonder at Tesla’s technical accomplishments and shiny vision of the future from economic reality. A negative assessment of reliability from Consumer Reports last month coincided with a rash of lowered recommendations or target prices for the stock.
Given how much of its market value hinges on its mass-market sedan, which won’t even begin to go on sale until 2016, delays of mere thousands of vehicles or quality snafus shouldn’t matter much in theory. But they do because they serve as a reality check on extremely ambitious plans in an increasingly competitive electric-vehicle market. For that reason, Tuesday’s delivery update could have an outsize impact.
After blinding acceleration, it is time to change gears.

