Tesla Aims to Build Its Electric Cars in China
CEO Elon Musk says local production could cut price of its cars by a third in that country
Oct. 23, 2015 8:10 am ET

SHANGHAI—Luxury electric-car maker Tesla Motors Inc. TSLA 2.54%▲ is in discussions with state and national government officials about producing its $76,000 and up vehicles in China, where the government is vigorously promoting reduced-emissions vehicles. The car maker said it hopes to make a definitive announcement resulting from those discussions soon.
Chief Executive Elon Musk said local production could cut sales prices of Tesla cars in China by a third, thanks to reduced shipping costs and avoidance of import duties. He earlier in 2015 told official Xinhua News Agency that Chinese production could be possible “within three years.”
Mr. Musk’s remarks were made at a forum on Thursday at Tsinghua University in Beijing.
In China, the company’s Model S sedan price starts at 673,000 yuan, about $106,000, including duties and other taxes.
Mr. Musk is betting on China’s huge demand for electric cars. By 2030, more than half the newly produced vehicles in the world will be battery-powered, and China will take the biggest share, he said, according to a transcript of his speech posted on Tesla’s verified Chinese social-media account.
China is the world’s largest car market, with nearly 20 million cars sold last year. In the first three quarters of this year China sold 28,092 electric and hybrid plug-in electric vehicles, more than double the year-earlier figure, largely thanks to generous government incentives.
Still, it is far from Beijing’s target of half a million such vehicles on the road by the end of 2015 and 10 times that by the end of the decade.
Tesla, which is based in Palo Alto, Calif., may need to find a local partner to begin production. China currently prohibits foreign car makers from assembling vehicles in the local market without a Chinese partner, which can make it much more difficult to operate here.
The Wall Street Journal reported in August that Tesla planned to press Obama administration officials to talk to Xi Jinping about making it easier for auto makers to do business in China during the Chinese president’s visit to the U.S. last month.
Tesla also has pledged to modify its vehicles to meet China’s charging standards, to allay concerns over technological compatibility there.
China is crucial to fulfill Mr. Musk’s ambition, and competition in the electric-car segment here is intensifying. Any news of an uptick in sales would surely be good news for investors given the flood of discouraging developments surrounding the company in recent months.
Tesla currently does most production in California. In Tilburg, The Netherlands, Tesla recently opened a plant to do final assembly of its Model S sedans, with the skeletons of the vehicles arriving from the U.S.
In March, Tesla said it was cutting jobs in China.The company didn’t give details and declined at the time to confirm a Chinese media report that 180 employees would lose their jobs.
In the first three quarters of this year Tesla delivered 3,025 cars to Chinese consumers, according to the company. Mr. Muskhadsaid that he would consider it a success if Tesla were to sell 5,000 vehicles or more in Chinaa year.
Last month, China’s central government required local authorities to remove restrictions on electric-car purchases and uses in a bid to boost sales of the vehicles. Metro areas such as Beijing ban cars with odd and even license plates from roads on alternate days, and many cities require would-be car owners to either bid for a license or take part in a lottery for one.
--Rose Yu
