Tesla Risks Losing Status as ‘Cult Stock’ Amid Reliability Concerns
By 
Kristen ScholerFollow
Updated Oct. 21, 2015 10:26 am ET

Shares of Tesla Motors Inc. may be running out of steam.

Brian Johnson, an analyst at Barclays PLC, is warning that "Tesla's status as a 'cult stock'" is at risk after Consumer Reports yanked its recommendation on Tesla’s Model S Tuesday over reliability concerns.

Shares of the electric-car company dropped 6.6% Tuesday after Consumer Reports revealed that owners of the plug-in electric luxury car complained about a range of issues, including charging problems to leaky sunroofs. Wednesday morning the stock is down 1.4% to $210.06.
Over at Pacific Crest Securities, analyst Brad Erickson said now is "not the time to own [Tesla]” and that the quality issues revealed Tuesday “throw more cold water on Tesla’s story.”
Since reaching a 2015 high on July 20, Tesla’s stock has skidded 27% as the Street has dialed back its bullish stance on shares. In the second week of October, three analysts cut their price target on shares, including Mr. Johnson, shortly after the launch of the company’s Model X SUV.
The recent weakness in Tesla comes after the stock soared in 2013 and 2014, gaining 344% and 48%, respectively, each year as investors wanted to get a piece of Elon Musk’s company that was touted to revolutionize the car industry.
“Assumptions of perpetually strong demand have always been heavily baked into the name, which leaves potential for significant further downside,” said Mr. Erickson, who thinks the Consumer Reports survey could negatively impact demand for new vehicles.
“We are incrementally more cautious in light of [Tuesday’s] news and remain sidelined on the name.”
Over at Barclays, Mr. Johnson thinks Tesla will see some near-term demand impact from the results of the reliability report, though he thinks they will prove transitory. He said he’s “comfortable” Tesla will be able to address reliability issues and pointed out that other luxury cars also fail to make Consumer Reports’ recommended list, yet still find buyers.
Still, he said he sees the potential for further headwinds for the shares if the company fails to meet high expectations with the Model X.
Mr. Johnson has an "underweight" rating on shares, while Mr. Erickson has a neutral recommendation. Eight of the 20 Tesla analysts followed by FactSet, or 40%, are neutral on shares, up from 30% at the end of last year. About a third, or 35%, of analysts are currently bullish and 25% are bearish.

