Short-Seller Jim Chanos Makes Tesla’s Tough Week Even Worse
By 
Kristen ScholerFollow
Oct. 9, 2015 3:46 pm ET

Short-seller Jim Chanos added insult to injury to Tesla Motors Inc. this week.
The electric-car company’s stock is down 10.3% the past five days, on track for its worst weekly percentage performance in more than a year. That's after billionaire hedge fund manager Mr. Chanos talked down the stock Thursday and several Wall Street analysts downgraded their view on shares over the past few days.
“In order to sell millions of cars, which is where the stock is valued…they’ve got a long way to go,” Mr. Chanos said Thursday in an interview with CNN.
Tesla, a long-time momentum stock, catapulted the past two years, soaring 556% during 2013 and 2014, well outperforming the S&P 500’s 44% gain during that time. But the stock has hit several speed bumps in 2015, down 0.2% this year, amid concerns about the company’s ability to meet delivery targets and turn a profit.
Mr. Chanos outlined his bearish thesis on Tesla two years ago at a Heard on the Street conference, saying that Tesla had gone beyond an interesting product or innovation to becoming speculative and a “cult” stock.
Despite negative commentary on Tesla over the years, Mr. Chanos hasn’t explicitly said he’s short shares and didn’t respond to a request for comment Friday on his position.
At The Wall Street Journal conference in 2013, Mr. Chanos said people should assume he’s short any stock he mentions. But he also noted that doesn’t necessarily mean he’s short every company he talks about, making it unclear whether he’s actually been short Tesla.
Mr. Chanos’ recent comments come as Wall Street strategists are taking their foot off the gas pedal for Tesla.
Friday Barclays analysts downgraded Tesla shares to “underweight” from “equal weight” and trimmed their 12-month price target to $180 from $190, writing that manufacturing challenges and a slow production ramp will pressure gross margins and delivery guidance.
“While the bulls believe Tesla will be the next Ford, we see many challenges ahead for Tesla and argue that ‘crossing the chasm’ is harder than it looks,” said Barclays analyst Brian Johnson. His lowered price target of $180 is 19% below where Tesla’s stock recently traded Friday.
Earlier this week, on Wednesday, Ben Kallo at Robert W. Baird & Co. downgraded shares to “neutral” from “outperform” and slashed his target price by $53 to $282 from $335.
Mr. Kallo thinks the Model X production ramp will be slower than expected, which he said could weigh on delivery estimates, and that the high price point for the vehicle will cause some orders to be canceled, potentially reducing the market size.
Tesla’s biggest bull, Morgan Stanley’s Adam Jonas, even threw in the towel on Tesla shares Tuesday, slicing his price target to $450 from $465, saying the Model X’s “very expensive” price makes 2016 volume targets difficult to achieve.
“[Model X] deliveries started last week and are continuing as we ramp production, customers are delighted,” said a Tesla spokesperson who declined to comment on the company's share price or recent remarks by analysts or Mr. Chanos
While demand for Tesla’s pricey electric vehicles remains strong, the reality that the company won’t get much benefit from its Model X in the final quarter of the year is weighing on shares and causing Wall Street to take caution.

