Tesla Is Having Its Best Day in Over a Year

Investors are flocking back to shares of Tesla Motors Inc. Wednesday.
The electric-car company’s stock is up as much as 12% midday after Tesla stuck to its sales target for the year in its latest earnings release Tuesday night. That marks its best intraday percentage performance in a year and a half.
“A better-than-feared outlook combined with Model 3 and Gigafactory optimism could buoy recently negative sentiment on [Tesla],” said Brad Erickson, an analyst at Pacific Crest Securities.
Tesla reiterated its 2016 production and delivery guidance of between 1,600 and 1,800 vehicles a week, or around 90,000 over 12 months. It also said it expects to deliver between 50,000 and 52,000 vehicles in 2015, guiding to the lower end of its outlook from August that was between 50,000 and 55,000 units.
The company’s sales outlook came amid worries about Tesla’s ability to ramp production and meet sales targets as it burns through cash at a rapid pace. Tesla has poured hundreds of millions of dollars into preparing for the launch of its new Model X SUV that debuted at the end of September, and it needs the revenue from sales to pay for its growth.
There weren’t many drastic changes to analysts’ views following the company’s third-quarter release. Only one of 20 Tesla analysts FactSet tracks changed his opinion on shares.
George Galliers, an analyst with Evercore ISI, lowered his price target on Tesla to $310 from $320, 36% above where the stock recently traded at $228.56. Mr. Galliers said he cut his target to reflect a “slower than previously anticipated ramp of the Model X.” He said he remains a buyer of Tesla, though, and takes away “plenty of positives” from the company’s report.
In Tesla’s letter to shareholders, chief executive Elon Musk addressed the Model X production ramp, writing that it will be the primary factor limiting fourth quarter deliveries, with the “biggest constraint being the supply of components related to the second row monopost seats.” He added that he expects the electric SUV to achieve “steady state production capacity” during the first quarter of 2016 though.
Wall Street has grown increasingly cautious on Tesla’s stock as the year has progressed as the company has struggled to build its vehicles and the Model X launch was delayed.
Last month the stock shed nearly 11% in a single week after famed short seller Jim Chanos said the company is still far from being a mass-market manufacturer and several analysts cut their target prices on shares.
For the year, the stock is higher by 2.7% after being up as much as 29% on the year in the middle of July.
