Charge Into Tesla Motors

 
November 26, 2012

Though not yet official, recent Tesla Motors commentary suggests an increase in the Model S price for new reservations is on the horizon.
Though this may lead to concerns over the impact on demand and implications for the current run-rate of order confirmations and profitability, we believe it may reflect a broader strategy of: a) adjusting to a higher-end, less price-elastic customer base; and b) market segmentation ahead of its lower-end $30,000 Gen 3.
While Tesla (ticker: TSLA) stock may be pressured on the news, we view any dip as a buying opportunity. We rate Tesla at Buy.
 
Though neither issued in an official press release nor cited in its often used blog, informal commentary from Tesla's director of online experience, Nick Kincaid, on its online forum suggested Tesla is planning to raise prices on its Model S for reservations not confirmed sometime soon. Despite the unofficial nature of the release, in light of: a) the details offered on the price-change implementation; and b) communications manager, Shanna Hendriks, telling the media to expect "more information on the price increase in the next few weeks," we believe it is more than likely true.
In light of widespread doubts about Tesla's ability to hit its 20,000 annual demand and 25% gross-margin targets, this could pour fuel on the fire of doubts on the premise that: a) a higher-price point could shut out more price-sensitive market segments; and b) production/supplier problems have inflated costs enough that higher prices may be needed to protect margins.
In our view, the closing statement that "the price increase will not affect [current reservations] as long as they configure and finalize their order within a fair, predetermined time frame" suggests that the overarching goal of the sudden pricing change may be to light a fire under reservation holders to confirm soon. While a reservation requires a $5,000 deposit, it is refundable until confirmed when options/specs are chosen. Though reservations exceed 13,000, we believe confirmation deferrals may be running higher than expected and driving Tesla to a "now or never" price strategy.
More optimistically, Tesla might also simply be marking its pricing to market to reflect the recognition of a higher-end customer base that Tesla may now realize is for the most part inelastic to a price hike of $3,000-$7,000.
Finally, we note the prospect of a broader strategy being implemented. With plans to introduce a Gen-3 model at a lower-price point of about $30,000, we believe this may represent Tesla further segmenting its target market by explicitly distinguishing the Model S as a higher-end alternative to Gen 3.
While bulls and bears both could be emboldened by the news, we believe the uncertainty is more likely to pressure the stock trading at the high-end of a defined range. With our thesis intact, we view any dip as an opportunity.
-- Aaron Chew
-- Francesco Citro
