Channeling Tesla, Brammo Zooms To Polaris Partnership
By Ty McMahan
Oct. 26, 2011 4:30 pm ET
SAVE
PRINT
TEXT
As a venture-backed maker of electric vehicles, Brammo often draws comparisons to Tesla Motors.


Brammo hopes its partnership with Polaris will give it a sales boost for its motorbikes, like this one, the Enertia Plus, which retails for $8,995.
BRAMMO
Tesla, which builds a roadster for those who want their lead foot to leave less of a carbon footprint, received a big boost last year when Toyota took a small ownership stake in the company by investing $50 million immediately after Tesla's initial public offering. The two have since announced a plan to collaborate on an electric version of Toyota's compact crossover, the RAV4.

During a game of flashcards with his son, it occurred to Brammo CEO Craig Bramscher that Tesla is to Toyota what motorbike maker Brammo is to Polaris, a builder of snowmobiles, motorcyles and ATVs. Over the last year, Bramscher has been talking with Polaris about ways they can work together.

The two companies announced today a formal relationship, with Polaris Industries leading a second tranche of Brammo's $28 million Series B round of funding. The round includes further contributions from existing shareholders Alpine Energy, Best Buy Capital and Chysalix, while adding NorthPort Investments. The Ashland, Ore.-based company has raised a total of $39 million.

Brammo's foundation is in battery and powertrain technology, found in its four models of motorcycles. This same technology has potential in both the powersports and the low-speed vehicles markets where Polaris is also big player.

Bramscher said he was particularly encouraged by Polaris' foray into electric vehicles with the acquisition of Global Electric Motorcars, a maker of small, street-legal cars.

"Our technology lends a lot to their product line," Bramscher said. "We think we have the best batteries and best motor drive out there and will work well together."

The partnership also opens up Brammo's sales reach. Polaris has more than 3,000 dealerships, compared with Brammo's 30. Bramscher isn't sure how many dealerships will ultimately carry Brammo bikes, but he expects a boost from the Polaris sales channel and financing options.

Copyright ©2022 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 87990cbe856818d5eddac44c7b1cdeb8
