Tesla Reports Loss on Higher Research Costs
Expenses at Luxury Car Maker Rise Ahead of Launch of New Sports-Utility Vehicles
By Joseph B. White
Follow
 and Mike Ramsey
Follow
Updated May 7, 2014 7:39 pm ET


Tesla Motors Inc. TSLA 2.54%▲ shares fell in after-market trading Wednesday after the Silicon Valley electric-car maker reported a net loss of $49.8 million for the first quarter, reflecting a surge in costs associated with expanding its product lineup and customer-service operations and launching a huge new battery factory.

Tesla Chief Executive Elon Musk disclosed during a conference call after the close of New York stock trading Wednesday that Panasonic Corp., manufacturer of the batteries used in his company's luxury electric cars, has signed a letter of intent to participate in construction of what he calls the "gigafactory" for assembling vehicle batteries in the U.S.
Mr. Musk said Tesla plans to break ground on the first potential site for the factory next month, and start work on preparing a second possible site soon after. Tesla plans to start work on multiple sites as a hedge against regulatory or other delays. The company aims to start battery production by 2017, and Mr. Musk said he's confident of achieving a 30% reduction in battery costs per kilowatt hour.
Panasonic would be the only battery company producing cells in the factory, which is proposed to be 10 million square feet and cost as much as $5 billion, Mr. Musk said.
Panasonic, in a statement, confirmed that it has signed a letter of intent with Tesla. "The two companies have signed a letter of intent and are further deepening the level of their discussions on details of gigafactory collaboration," said Jim Reilly, a spokesman for Panasonic in the U.S.

Mr. Musk also disclosed that California "is back in the running" as a site for the factory. Previously California was off the list, he said, because of the "complex and lengthy" process of obtaining permits. Tesla plans to begin breaking ground on the first of two finalist sites in June, then a second site a few weeks later. Tesla is also looking at sites in Nevada, New Mexico, Texas and Arizona.
Mr. Musk's optimistic comments about his battery-factory project came after investors had sent the company's share price down more than 6% in after-market trading following the release of Tesla's first-quarter financial results.
The company forecast rising costs for vehicle engineering, new plants and other expansion moves that may have spooked investors, along with a forecast of another net loss in the second quarter. Tesla said capital spending exceeded operating cash flow by $80.7 million in the first quarter.

The Silicon Valley electric-luxury-car maker said it produced 7,535 Model S sedans in the January to March quarter, slightly more than its earlier forecast. Revenue for the latest quarter was $620.5 million, up 10% from a year earlier, but up less than 1% from the fourth quarter of 2013. Net orders for Model S sedans in North America grew by 10% from the fourth quarter, the company said. Model S deliveries in the U.S. fell, however, as more cars were shipped overseas.
The company forecast a marginal profit for the second quarter on a non-GAAP basis.
Research and development costs rose to $81.5 million in the latest quarter from $54.9 million a year ago. The company said it expects R&D expenses for the second quarter to grow by 30% from the first quarter. Much of that expense is related to development of the company's Model X sport-utility vehicle, which Tesla said would launch in the second quarter of 2015, a delay from earlier estimates of late this year or early next year.
Tesla raised $2.3 billion through convertible bond offerings in the first quarter, in part, to contribute toward building the battery factory, capable of making hundreds of thousands of battery packs for its vehicles.
Mr. Musk said he is optimistic about the prospects for Tesla in China, the world's largest car market. "I don't think we've got any kind of a demand challenge in China," he said, adding he's instructed employees working in the country to "spend money as fast as they can spend it without wasting it."Tesla is looking into building its vehicles in China within three or four years, he said, and could also build vehicles in Europe as sales expand.
Tesla said its automotive gross margins, measured on a non-GAAP basis, would increase slightly in the second quarter from the 25.4% reported for the first quarter. The company said a 28% automotive gross margin "is still an achievable target" by the fourth quarter. Analysts study this measure closely because it points to the efficiency and profitability of making and selling vehicles, during a period when heavy investment in research and development and capital lower overall margins.
Tesla said it plans to invest $650 million to $850 million in capital expenditures for the year to boost production, expand its service and charging networks, launch new models and start work on its battery factory.
The company said it is growing its internal production capability to meet growing demand for its Model S. Production is now at almost more than 700 vehicles a week, up 15% from its weekly production rate at the end of the fourth quarter. By the end of 2014, Tesla expects the production rate to rise to 1,000 vehicles a week.
Tesla's results, again, were dented by stock-based compensation for executives. Tesla said the share costs amounted to $37 million—or 30 cents a share. Other costs it subtracted in its accounting were non-cash expenses related to its convertible note and deferred profit related to lease accounting.
